AMP-71940 One-pager for next-gen SDKs (#678)
Amplitude-Developer-Docs/amplitude-dev-center: docs/data/sdks/next-gen-sdks.md

---
title: Next Generation SDKs
description: Introduction to Next Generation SDK, common methods and benefits
---

This article helps you remove confusion around various Amplitude Analytics SDKs and introduces the Next Generation SDKs.

The **Next Generation (next-gen) SDKs** is a group of Amplitude Analytics SDKs that share the same architecture and interfaces. 

> Amplitude puts an SDK into maintenance status and under the "**Maintenance SDKs**" section in the left bar if another same-platform next-gen SDK is available, for example, Browser, Android, React Native, and Node.js. Maintenance SDKs only receives bug fixes until deprecation. It's strongly recommended to adopt next-gen SDKs to take advantage of their benefits. To migrate from a maintenance SDK, refer to the migration guide under each next-gen SDK documentation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Amplitude puts an SDK into maintenance status and under the "**Maintenance SDKs**" section in the left bar if another same-platform next-gen SDK is available, for example, Browser, Android, React Native, and Node.js. Maintenance SDKs only receive bug fixes until deprecation. It's strongly recommended to adopt next-gen SDKs to take advantage of their benefits. To migrate from a maintenance SDK, refer to the migration guide under each next-gen SDK documentation. 
```

Author: fixed

> Amplitude puts an SDK into maintenance status and under the "**Maintenance SDKs**" section in the left bar if another same-platform next-gen SDK is available, for example, Browser, Android, React Native, and Node.js. Maintenance SDKs only receives bug fixes until deprecation. It's strongly recommended to adopt next-gen SDKs to take advantage of their benefits. To migrate from a maintenance SDK, refer to the migration guide under each next-gen SDK documentation. 

Reviewer: I also think we can use the bullet point to make the comparison more strong. 
- **Next Generation (next-gen) SDKs**
   xxx
- **Mantaince SDKs
   xxxx

And we can add a reference to https://pr-678.d19s7xzcva2mw3.amplifyapp.com/data/sdks/next-gen-sdks/#sdk-status-table to let them check more details. 
And the status table, I think we can also change the structure a little bit. 
| Platform | Next Generation SDK | Mantaince SDK | Migration Guide | 
|--------|--------|--------|--------|
| Browser | [@amplitude/analytics-browser](../../data/sdks/typescript-browser/) | [amplitude-js](../../data/sdks/javascript/) |  [Link](../../data/sdks/typescript-browser/migration/) |

> Amplitude puts an SDK into maintenance status and under the "**Maintenance SDKs**" section in the left bar if another same-platform next-gen SDK is available, for example, Browser, Android, React Native, and Node.js. Maintenance SDKs only receives bug fixes until deprecation. It's strongly recommended to adopt next-gen SDKs to take advantage of their benefits. To migrate from a maintenance SDK, refer to the migration guide under each next-gen SDK documentation. 

Author: Updated to have 3 columns: Platform, Next-gen, Not next-gen.

Will add "Migration" after adding migrations guides of Android, React Native, Node.js. Currently we only have Browser migration guide

!!!note 
    There are still some SDKs that aren't nex-gen while also not in maintenance, for example Flutter, Java, and iOS. 

Refer to the [SDK status table](./#sdk-status-table) to check whether a SDK is next-gen or in maintenance. 

## Architecture

> Next-gen SDKs share the same architecture and interfaces across platform. Refer to each SDK full documentation for more details. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The next-gen SDKs share the same architecture and interfaces across platforms. This page covers the high-level functionality across all next-gen SDKs. Refer to the individual SDK documentation for more detailed examples.
```

> ![Next-gen Architecture](/../assets/images/data-next-gen-sdk-architecture.png)

Reviewer 3: Consider using drawio to create the diagrams as a `.drawio.svg`. See the experiment docs as an example.

If you install the drawio plugin in vscode you can create and edit images in your IDE while developing locally. The special file format lets you edit the file directly, so you dont need to store a local editable version and a png for the site and manage the two separately. Even better you can save your diagram, refresh the local server and see the updated image. 

![Screen Shot 2023-03-30 at 9 23 50 AM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3282199/228901781-70100219-6d60-4d17-b094-0d1e977c1b73.png)

All the images I manage for experiment docs use this format and its very nice when I need to edit them. See docs/assets/images/experiment for examples.

Author: @bgiori This is awesome! Also added this tool to the Wiki https://github.com/Amplitude-Developer-Docs/amplitude-dev-center/wiki#4-optional-but-highly-encouraged-install-vscode-drawio

### Client

Amplitude Client stores configurations and is also the entry point for developers to track events. 

> Before instrument, you must initialize a SDK using the API key for your Amplitude project, which creates an Amplitude Client. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Before instrumenting events, you must initialize a SDK client instance using the API key for your Amplitude project. 
```

```python 
# Next-gen Python SDK example: initialize a Client

from amplitude import Amplitude

amplitude = Amplitude('API_KEY')

> ```

Reviewer 2: Browser TS is the most heavily used SDK. Can you please update the examples to be for Browser TS.

Reviewer: +1

Author: Updated examples to TS

### Configuration

> Configuration includes the options to configure Client behavior. 

Reviewer: Should we talk about the difference between the maintenance SDK and the next gen SDK? 
Most legacy SDKs are using setters, but new SDKs can set the configurations during the init step which is much more convenience.

Reviewer 2: I was thinking to keep this doc mostly focused on NextGen SDK so it can act as the go to reference for how the new SDKs work. I want limit comparison to the legacy SDKs to a single section as not to confuse new users.

Author: Discussed this in team sync and we all agreed that we should talk minimum about maintenance SDK in this page, because this page should focus on next-gen SDKs and we do no want our customers to learn something they don't need if they are new to Amplitude

You can pass a Configuration when Client initialization.

```python
# Next-gen Python SDK example: initialize a Client with a Configuration

from amplitude import Amplitude
from amplitude import Config

amplitude = Amplitude("API_KEY", 
                      configuration=Config(
                            flush_queue_size=100, # flush queued events when there are 100 or more
                            flush_interval_millis=20000 # flush queued events every 20 seconds
                    )) 
```

You can also get access to the Configuration of your Client after initialization.

```python

> Next-gen Python SDK example: get access to the Configuration of your Client

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# Next-gen Python SDK example: get access to the Configuration of your Client
```

from amplitude import Amplitude

client = Amplitude('API_KEY')
# flush queued events when there are 100 or more
client.configuration.flush_queue_size = 100
# flush queued events every 20 seconds
client.configuration.flush_interval_millis = 20000
```

### Storage provider

A storage provider holds events in a designated storage buffer. The default storage provider only queues events in memory. To prevent data lose, you can customize your own storage provider to persist events, for example to a disk, in case of unexpected shutdown. This way, you can ensure that you can recover un-sent events even in the event of a system failure. 

> You can configure the storage provider in the Configuration of your Client. Refer to the "Configuration Options" section of a specific next-gen SDK full documentation for more details.

Reviewer 2: nit: "full documentation" seems superfluous. I think "specific next-gen SDK documentation" is good.

> 

Reviewer 2: StorageProvider code snippet?

Author: Added a StorageProvider Browser SDK example, but left the methods blank. 
If there is a good example, we could fill it up later

```class MyStorage<T> {
  isEnabled(): Promise<boolean> {
    // Whether the storage is enabled
  }

  get(key: string): Promise<T | undefined> {
    // get the value associated with the given key in the storage
  }

  getRaw(key: string): Promise<string | undefined> {
    // get the string associated with the given key in the storage
  }

  set(key: string, value: T): Promise<void> {
    // set an item in the storage by key
  }

  remove(key: string): Promise<void> {
    // remove an item in the storage by key
  }

  reset(): Promise<void> {
    // clear the storage
}
```

> ### Logger provider

Reviewer 2: +1

> ### Logger provider

Author: added an logger provider browser sdk example

> A logger provider configure the logger instance used by Amplitude Client. It helps to collect debugging and error messages from the SDK in both development and production environments.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A logger provider configures the logger instance used by the Amplitude Client. It helps to collect debugging and error messages from the SDK in both development and production environments.
```

> You can configure the logger provider in the Configuration of your Client. Refer to the "Configuration Options" section of a specific next-gen SDK full documentation for more details.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can configure the logger provider in the Client Configuration. Refer to the "Configuration Options" section of a specific next-gen SDK full documentation for more details.
```

### Event 

Events represent how users interact with your application. 

`BaseEvent` represents a basic event with optional properties. You can also track other event properties in the field of `EventProperties`

```python
# Next-gen Python SDK example: Event

from amplitude import Amplitude, BaseEvent

client = Amplitude('API_KEY')

# Track a basic event
# One of user_id and device_id is required
event = BaseEvent(event_type="Button Clicked", user_id="USER_ID")
client.track(event)

# Track events with optional properties
client.track(
    BaseEvent(
        event_type="Button Clicked",
        user_id="USER_ID",
        app_version="1.2.1" # optional, the current version of your application
        event_properties={ # other event properties you want to track 
            "color": "red"
        }
))
```

### Plugin

> Plugins allow you to extend Amplitude SDK's behavior by, for example:

Reviewer: I think we should say maintenance SDKs using middleware, and next-gen use Plugins is the replacement. I think it is the good place to show the structure of the payload to let the customer know which they can update while using the plugin.

Reviewer 2: I think it might be better to have a dedicated page about middleware that we can link to from here.

Author: Put this to "Comparison with maintenance SDK" section and leave this section clean to introduce only plugins

- Use an Enrichment Plugin to modify event properties
- Use a Destination Plugin to send events to a third-party APIs

> 

Reviewer 2: We should probably mention the order of plugins again in this section: Enrichment -> Destinations. And that all enrichment plugins run in the order they were added, then all destinations in order then were added.

Author: Added a explanation of execution order

A plugin is an object with methods `setup()` and `execute()`:

- `setup()` method contains logic for preparing the plugin for use and has Client instance as a parameter. The expected return value is None. A typical use for this method is to copy configuration from `client.configuration` or instantiate plugin dependencies. This method is called when you register the plugin to the client via `client.add()`.

> - `execute()` method the logic for processing events and has event instance as parameter. The expected return value for an Enrichment Plugin is the modified/enriched event, while the expected return value for a Destination Plugin is a map with keys: event (BaseEvent), code (HTTP response status code), and message (string). This method is called for each event that's instrumented using the client interface.

Reviewer 2: We should call out that if `execute()` returns no event, the event will not propagate through the remaining plugins. It could be good to also include an example of a "drop events" plugin which is also a common ask from customers.

> 

Reviewer 2: Can you please add a simple Plugin example for each Plugin type.
* Enrichment - maybe remove PII, or add a new property to all events?
* Destination - segment probably, I get lost of asks for that, there is an example in the Ampli examples

Author: Examples added

## Common methods

Next-gen SDKs share the same architecture as well as the same interfaces. Aligned interfaces benefit using Amplitude SDKs on multiple platforms without memorizing different function names.

This a list of shared interfaces of next-gen SDKs. 

!!!note 
    Different SDKs follow different naming conventions. Here use camel case for methods and parameters and use pascal case for classes. 

> 

Reviewer 2: + init ?

Author: Added `init`

Discussed in team sync and we agreed that event though some SDKs, like Python, don't have `init`, we still need to list it here because it is part of the common interfaces of next-gen SDKs.

- `track(BaseEvent)`
- `identify(IdentifyEvent)`
- `setGroup(groupType, groupName)`
- `groupIdentify(groupType, groupName, IdentifyEvent)`
- `revenue(RevenueEvent)`
- `flush()`
- `add(Plugin)`
- `remove(Plugin)`
- `shutdown()`

> ## Next-gen benefits 

Reviewer 2: +1. Maybe this is even above architecture. It does a good high-level overview, then the architecture section can cover it again in detail.

> ## Next-gen benefits 

Author: Moved to top.

    - Aligned interfaces benefit using Amplitude SDKs on multiple platforms without memorizing different function names. For example, before next-gen SDKs, to track an event with different properties, you need to use different functions, for example `logEvent()`, `logEventWithTimestamp()`, `logEventWithGroup()`, etc. Right now with next-gen SDKs, you can just use by `track()` with all properties in `EventOptions`
    
- Next-gen SDKs are **more reliable and robust**
    - Next-gen SDKs don't require any external dependencies, which enhances performance, mitigate potential issues caused by dependencies, and makes them more lightweight
    - Next-gen SDKs use file storage instead of database to improve performance
    - Next-gen Android SDK removes OkHttp which addresses dependency compatibility issues

## Comparison with maintenance SDK

If you are migrating from maintenance SDKs, you may notice that next-gen SDKs differ from maintenance SDKs not only in terms of interfaces but also in their Middleware vs Plugin architecture . You can think of Middleware as being equal to Enrichment Plugin and Destination Plugin.

## SDK status table

> |Platform|Next-gen|Maintenance|Which SDK (repo name)|SDK Package|

Reviewer 2: What about condensing this into 3 columns? I think it could be easier to parse versus the alternating checks and x's. For any SDK without next-gen we can put an x in the next gen column.
```suggestion
|Platform|Next-gen|Maintenance|
|Browser|Repo: Amplitude-TypeScript\nSDK Package:`@amplitude/analytics-browser`\nDocs:<docs-url>|Repo: Amplitude-JavaScript\nSDK Package:`@amplitude/amplitude-js`\nDocs:<docs-url>|
```
And then

Author: It's more clean to have 3 columns. But I changed the third column name from "Maintenance" to "Not next-gen" to reflect the truth that there are some SDKs are not next-gen or maintenance.

|--------|---|---|---------------------|-----------|

> |[Browser](./javascript/index.md)|:material-close:|:material-check:|[Amplitude-JavaScript](https://github.com/amplitude/Amplitude-JavaScript)|`@amplitude/amplitude-js`|

Reviewer 3: use the `{ .green }` or `{ .red }` suffix on the `:material-check:` and `:material-close:` icons, respectively to modify the color to make this table more visual.

```suggestion
|[Browser](./javascript/index.md)|:material-close:{ .red }|:material-check:{ .green }|[Amplitude-JavaScript](https://github.com/amplitude/Amplitude-JavaScript)|`@amplitude/amplitude-js`|
```

Author: That's awesome. Update the table and make maintenance SDK icon red.

---

> title: Next Generation SDKs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Analytics SDK Architecture
```

> description: Introduction to Next Generation SDK, common methods and benefits

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: Overview of Amplitude Analytics SDK architecture and common usage
```

---

This article helps you remove confusion around various Amplitude Analytics SDKs and introduces the Next Generation SDKs.

The **Next Generation (next-gen) SDKs** are a group of Amplitude Analytics SDKs that share the same architecture and interfaces. 

Amplitude also has "**Maintenance SDKs**". These are the time tested, stable SDKs of old. Once a next-gen SDK is available for a given platform, older SDKs are moved to maintenance status and under the **Maintenance SDKs** section in the site navigation. For example, Browser, Android, React Native, and Node.js. Maintenance SDKs only receives bug fixes until deprecation. It's strongly recommended to adopt next-gen SDKs to take advantage of their benefits. To migrate from a maintenance SDK, refer to the migration guide under each maintenance SDK documentation.

!!!note 

>     There are still some SDKs that aren't nex-gen while also not in maintenance, for example Flutter, Java, and iOS. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    There are still some SDKs that haven't updated to the latest architecture, while also not in maintenance, for example Flutter, Java, and iOS. 
```
